(CAMERA SLATE)
Common mark
(FOOTSTEPS)
Okay... I'm set.
- Set.
- Camera A set.
(PIANO MUSIC)
So, can you tell me a bit about yourself
and how you communicate?
Hi, I'm Gretta,
I'm a 31 year old woman from Western Sydney.
As I am a non-verbal woman with severe Cerebral palsy,
my primary method of communication is using my iPad,
which I operate with my nose.
I'm Quang.
I'm 40 years old.
I communicate...
with my mobile phone,
laptop,
text to speech.
Why do you think communication is so important?
As a non-verbal woman,
I feel that communication is very important.
This is not only for safety
and getting someone's point across,
it is also a key factor for them
to express their personality and intelligence.
Personally, this importance of communication
was visible when I first went on social media,
as I felt I could express myself properly.
(TYPING)
(TEXT ALERT)
And what opportunities
do you think communication opens up for you?
(GENTLE PIANO MUSIC)
For me,
it took many years to find my most suitable
and efficient method of communication.
When I discovered how easy it was to use my iPad,
both of my online and offline worlds opened up for me
as I could express my views, opinions,
intelligence and personality to my full potential.
(TEXT ALERT)
How free do you feel to express yourself, and why?
I feel completely free by being able to fully communicate
because I have every opportunity to express myself
and really develop my personality
despite my disability.
(SIGHS)
And what are some of the barriers
that you face to communication?
The main barrier with my communication,
which I feel I somewhat struggle with,
is the time I take to prepare responses.
I mainly recognise this
when I am talking within a group of people
as I struggle to keep up with conversation.
This barrier is particularly present
when I am having a heated discussion with someone
or when people are impatient with the wait time.
(EXPERIMENTAL STRING MUSIC)
(TYPING)
(TEXT ALERT)
EMILY: Can you describe a time in your life
when it was difficult for you to communicate,
and sort of how that made you feel?
Although I can't remember one particular moment,
I do feel that I really start
to get frustrated with my communication
when I'm really upset with someone
and want to just yell at them to get my point across
so I tend to just yell,
and then become embarrassed that I look immature.
(TEXT ALERT)
I actually feel that people with disabilities
make normal mistakes everybody make,
people are more likely to have opinions about it
and analyse it as a behaviour that needs to be fixed.
Now, can you describe a time in your life
when it was made easier for you to communicate?
(TEXT ALERT)
(UPLIFTING MUSIC)
I think when I was at uni,
I felt that I was able to communicate freely,
and all of the lecturers and students
understood my communication needs.
In tutorials and lectures
I always made sure I said at least one thing,
so that the people around me knew
that my disability didn't affect my intellect.
(TEXT ALERT)
What would you say to someone who might be worried
about getting communication wrong?
I always say it's better to be honest with me.
When you don't understand
what the communicator is trying to express,
don't pretend that you understand.
Instead, just ask the communicator to continue trying
until they feel like they have gotten their message across.
When people give me this time,
I feel empowered and respected.
(TEXT ALERT)
And what are some of the other things that people can do
to be an effective communicator?
(TEXT ALERT)
(PIANO & SYNTH MUSIC)
Be patient and remember
most people that you're communicating with
want the best for you.
Is there anything else you'd like to add?
(TEXT ALERT)
(MUSIC BUILDS)
It's so amazing and extremely important
that these types of materials are coming out.
(MUSIC BUILDS)
(MUSIC SWELLS)
(PIANO)